Public-key cryptography is based on the intractability of certain mathematical problems. 
Early public-key systems are secure assuming that it is difficult to factor a large integer 
composed of two or more large prime factors. For elliptic-curve-based protocols, it is 
assumed that finding the discrete logarithm of a random elliptic curve element with respect 
to a publicly known base point is infeasible: this is the "elliptic curve discrete 
logarithm problem" (ECDLP). The security of elliptic curve cryptography depends on the 
ability to compute a point multiplication and the inability to compute the multiplicand given 
the original and product points. The size of the elliptic curve determines the difficulty 
of the problem.

The primary benefit promised by elliptic curve cryptography is a smaller key size, reducing 
storage and transmission requirements, i.e. that an elliptic curve group could provide the 
same level of security afforded by an RSA-based system with a large modulus and correspondingly 
larger key: for example, a 256-bit elliptic curve public key should provide comparable security 
to a 3072-bit RSA public key.

The U.S. National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) has endorsed elliptic curve 
cryptography in its Suite B set of recommended algorithms, specifically elliptic curve 
Diffie–Hellman (ECDH) for key exchange and Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm (ECDSA) 
for digital signature. The U.S. National Security Agency (NSA) allows their use for protecting 
information classified up to top secret with 384-bit keys.[2] However, in August 2015, the 
NSA announced that it plans to replace Suite B with a new cipher suite due to concerns about 
quantum computing attacks on ECC.[3]

While the RSA patent expired in 2000, there may be patents in force covering certain aspects 
of ECC technology. However some argue that the US government elliptic curve digital signature 
standard (ECDSA; NIST FIPS 186-3) and certain practical ECC-based key exchange schemes (including 
ECDH) can be implemented without infringing them, including RSA Laboratories[4] and Daniel J. 
Bernstein.[5]